This section will help you understand when and why your organization would want to use rtcd.

Note

rtcd is a standalone service, which adds operational complexity, maintenance costs, and requires an enterprise licence. For those who are evaluating Calls, and for many small instances of Mattermost, the integrated SFU (the one included in the Calls plugin) may be sufficient initially.

The rtcd service is the recommended way to host Calls for the following reasons:

Performance of the main Mattermost server(s). When the Calls plugin runs the SFU, calls traffic is added to the processing load of the server running the rest of your Mattermost services. If Calls traffic spikes, it can negatively affect the responsiveness of these services. Using an rtcd service isolates the calls traffic processing to those rtcd instances, and also reduces costs by minimizing CPU usage spikes.

Performance, scalability, and stability of the Calls product. If Calls traffic spikes, or more overall capacity is needed, rtcd servers can be added to balance the load. As an added benefit, if the Mattermost traffic spikes, or if a Mattermost instance needs to be restarted, those people in a current call will not be affected - current calls won’t be dropped.

Some caveats apply here. Web socket events (for example: emoji reactions, hand raising, muting/unmuting) will not be transmitted while the main Mattermost server is down. But the call itself will continue while the main server restarts.

Kubernetes deployments. In a Kubernetes deployment, rtcd is strongly recommended; it is currently the only officially supported way to run Calls.

Technical benefits. The dedicated rtcd service has been optimized and tuned at the system/network level for real-time audio/video traffic, where latency is generally more important than throughput.

In general, rtcd is the preferred solution for a performant and scalable deployment. With rtcd, the Mattermost server will be minimally impacted when hosting a high number of calls.
